Manifest Deployer Tutorial (#487)
gardener/landscaper: docs/gettingstarted/manifest-deployer-tutorial/README.md

# Deploy applications via Landscaper using manifest deployer

- [Deploy applications via Landscaper using manifest deployer](#deploy-applications-via-landscaper-using-manifest-deployer)
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Preparation of work environment](#preparation-of-work-environment)
    - [Structure of demo material](#structure-of-demo-material)
    - [Install the Landscaper together with an OCI registry](#install-the-landscaper-together-with-an-oci-registry)
  - [Deploy applications via Landscaper](#deploy-applications-via-landscaper)
    - [1. Push demo image content into OCI registry](#1-push-demo-image-content-into-oci-registry)
    - [2. Develop Landscaper artifacts](#2-develop-landscaper-artifacts)
    - [3. Push Component Archive to OCI Registry](#3-push-component-archive-to-oci-registry)
    - [4. Deploy the application](#4-deploy-the-application)

## Introduction

This tutorial describes how to use the Landscaper manifest deployer for installing an application into a Kubernetes cluster.

The demo is ordered into the following activities:

>   - [1. Push demo image content into OCI registry](#1-push-demo-image-content-into-oci-registry)

Reviewer: I agree. The artifacts are all in place. In the tutorial there is a folder called manifests which contains the  my-deployment.yaml and my-secret.yaml files. These two manifests plus the image would make up the simple app. One could then describe, how these manifests are integrated into the deploy-execution.

  - [2. Develop Landscaper artifacts](#2-develop-landscaper-artifacts)

>   - [3. Push Component Archive to OCI Registry](#3-push-component-archive-to-oci-registry)

Reviewer: Agree, this would also be in sync with the task "Develop Landscaper artifacts"

  - [4. Deploy the application](#4-deploy-the-application)

> ![alt text](README-deployment-4-steps.svg "Deployment with Landscaper in four steps")

Reviewer: I think this tutorial is for someone who already read about the core concepts. 
E.g.:
- what is a component archive
- what is the general purpose of the landscaper
- what are the basic building blocks of a landscaper deployed application (blueprint, deploy-execution, deployers, installation, target)

You cannot put all of this into one tutorial, if you do this, it gets too complex. The idea behind this tutorial was to give you a compact scenario in which you touch the basic deployment steps (push things to OCI registries, modify the CD, use the component-cli) etc.

Nevertheless, this is good feedback. We need to have a disclaimer on top of this tutorial which refers to our architecture documentation.

## Preparation of work environment

Before you start, you need a working demo environment. If you do not have one, please refer to ["Prepare demo environment"](prepare-demo-environment.md).

First, download [demo material from this repository]([/](https://download-directory.github.io/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fgardener%2Flandscaper%2Ftree%2Fmaster%2Fdocs%2Fgettingstarted%2fmanifest-deployer-tutorial)). You will edit some of the downloaded files later.

### Structure of demo material

The folder demo content contains a sample OCI image.
The folder manifests contains all Kubernetes manifests.
The folder component-archive contains all resources needed for building Landscaper deployable component.

``` text
./manifest-deployer-tutorial/
├── component-archive
│   ├── blueprint
│   │   ├── blueprint.yaml
│   │   └── deploy-execution.yaml
│   ├── component-descriptor.yaml
│   └── resources.yaml
├── demo-content
│   └── hello.tar
├── manifests
│   ├── installation.yaml
│   ├── my-deployment.yaml
│   ├── my-secret.yaml
│   └── my-target.yaml
├── prepare-demo-environment.md
└── README.md
```

| Demo environment | Productive environment |
| ------------- |-------------|

> | For demo purposes we will use a simplified setup with one cluster, which contains all necessary parts. | In a productive environment could be separated. |

Reviewer 2: What does that mean "In a productive environment could be separated"? What should be separated?

| ![alt text](README-env-demo.svg "demo all-in-one cluster") | ![alt text](README-env-productice.svg "One demo cluster and other possible setup")|

### Install the Landscaper together with an OCI registry

> The landscaper-cli provides a convenient quick start option for installing the Landscaper plus an OCI registry:

Reviewer 2: This is very confusing? Why do we install an OCI registry here? This comes without any motivation.

- OCI Registry

```text
NAME                                                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
container-default-container-deployer-5c6as449f9-dz4x6   1/1     Running   0          25s
helm-default-helm-deployer-7cd3fd9797-5c5rk             1/1     Running   0          41s
landscaper-654cbc4568-x6bs7                             1/1     Running   0          53s
landscaper-webhooks-58995rff45-htwcf                    1/1     Running   0          53s
manifest-default-manifest-deployer-7fbc87ef79-xpfnq     1/1     Running   0          31s
oci-registry-6654f55648-wg7bq                           1/1     Running   0          60s

```

Check availability of OCI registry:

``` bash
curl --location --request GET https://$OCI_REGISTRY/v2/_catalog -u "$OCI_USER:$OCI_PASSWD"
```

The curl should return this:

```text
{"repositories":[]}
```

## Deploy applications via Landscaper

### 1. Push demo image content into OCI registry

For this tutorial an OCI image is provided. The image contains a dummy application just for demonstration purposes. It does nothing, just keeps the container running.

The image is located at /manifest-deployer-tutorial/demo-content/hello.tar.

> For the next steps, dockerd must be up and running in demo environment.

Reviewer 2: Who knows what dockerd is? Rename this to "For the next steps you need a running docker environment". This is also not mentioned on dev setup page.

First, load the OCI image into local docker registry:

```bash
docker load --input ./demo-content/hello.tar
```

Then, push the OCI image into the OCI registry running inside the cluster.

``` bash
docker login -p $OCI_PASSWD -u $OCI_USER $OCI_REGISTRY

> docker tag hello:latest $OCI_REGISTRY/hello

Reviewer: Agree, and my bad. This should be indeed a concrete version. I fixed this.

``` yaml
component:
  componentReferences: []
  name: test.net/test
  provider: internal
  repositoryContexts:
  - baseUrl: <OCIURL>
    componentNameMapping: urlPath
    type: ociRegistry
  resources: []
  sources: []
  version: v0.1.0
meta:
  schemaVersion: v2
```

**resources.yaml**: The resource.yaml contains a list of resource definitions for e.g. OCI images and Blueprints. The resources needed by our application are an OCI image containing the sample application and a blueprint describing the Landscaper deployment. Have a look at the resources and their yaml definition in /manifest-deployer-tutorial/resources.yaml. Later, it is shown how to update the component-descriptor.yaml with the resources specified in resources.yaml using the component-cli tool.

**[blueprint](https://github.com/gardener/landscaper/blob/master/docs/concepts/Glossary.md#blueprint)**: This folder contains the blueprint.yaml. The Blueprint specifies any import parameters necessary for a Landscaper deployment, it specifies what kind of deployment should be executed (deploy-execution.yaml), and it specifies if the deployment creates output via export parameters.

> The application itself is not really of interest, it just keeps a container up and running. The container runs in a Pod, the  Pods has 3 Replicas, and all of this is specified in a Deployment manifest which you find in /manifest-deployer-tutorial/manifests/my-deployment.yaml. The other resource manifest we need for the application, is a Kubernetes resource of type Secret. This will allow Kubernetes to access the OCI registry which we deployed in the step "Install the Landscaper together with an OCI registry".

Reviewer: Good! Makes it more crisp to read!

1. In the component-descriptor.yaml (/manifest-deployer-tutorial/component-archive/), replace the `<OCIURL>` placeholder with the OCI registry URL as obtained in section "Install the Landscaper together with an OCI registry". E.g. replace `<OCIURL>` with o.ingress.p.democlust.shoot.k8s.myprovider.com.

2. In the resources.yaml (/manifest-deployer-tutorial/component-archive/), replace the `<IMAGEURL>` placeholder with the container image URL used in section "Push demo image content into OCI registry", to push the sample image into our OCI registry. E.g. replace `<IMAGEURL>` with o.ingress.p.democlust.shoot.k8s.myprovider.com/hello.

3. In deploy-excution.yaml (/manifest-deployer-tutorial/component-archive/blueprint/), replace the `<DOCKERCONFIG>` placeholder with a base64 encoded version of dockers config.json. You already did a docker login into your OCI registry, right?

    ``` bash
    cat ~/.docker/config.json | base64 --wrap=0
    ```

4. Add the resources defined in resource.yaml to component-descriptor.yaml by executing

    ``` bash
    component-cli component-archive resources add ./component-archive ./component-archive/resources.yaml
    ```

> 5. Verify updated content of component-descriptor. You need to replace the placeholder `<OCIURL>` with the OCI registry URL obtained in the section "Install the Landscaper together with an OCI registry", e.g. "o.ingress.p.democlust.shoot.k8s.myprovider.com"

Reviewer 3: I'm missing some motivation about what we are doing here. Adding "o.ingress.p.democlust.shoot.k8s.myprovider.com" means that we defined the upload location of the component descriptor "o.ingress.p.democlust.shoot.k8s.myprovider.com/component-descriptors" in the OCI registry

    ``` yaml
    component:
      componentReferences: []
      name: test.net/test
      provider: internal
      repositoryContexts:
      - baseUrl: <OCIURL>
        componentNameMapping: urlPath
        type: ociRegistry
      resources:
      - access:
          imageReference: <OCIURL>/hello
          type: ociRegistry
        name: hello
        relation: external
        type: ociImage
        version: v0.1.0
      - access:
          filename: sha256:a250692a6ca416d7d9442e22597eca9f2d5f0ab3dd2af231733ccdc3fb48820a
          mediaType: application/vnd.gardener.landscaper.blueprint.v1+tar+gzip
          type: localFilesystemBlob
        name: blueprint
        relation: local
        type: blueprint
        version: v0.1.0
      sources: []
      version: v0.1.0
    meta:
      schemaVersion: v2
    ```

> 6. Transform component-archive into Component Transport Format for our OCI registry:

Reviewer 3: I know this is very confusing and I'm not sure if this is really right but the think the correct description is: Convert the component located in ./component-archive/ into the Component Transport Format (CTF/ just a compressed tar of the folder structure) and add it to a component archive (just a tar of one or more components in CTF) located here ./transport.tar.

    ``` bash
    component-cli ctf add ./transport.tar --component-archive ./component-archive/ --format tar
    ```

### 3. Push Component Archive to OCI Registry

Upload component-archive into our OCI registry:

``` bash
component-cli ctf push ./transport.tar
```

Verify content of OCI registry:

``` bash

> curl --location --request GET https://$OCI_REGITRY/v2/_catalog -u "$OCI_USER:$OCI_PASSWD"

Reviewer 2: Typo: OCI_REGITRY --> OCI_REGISTRY

```

The curl should return the following:

``` text
{"repositories":["component-descriptors/test.net/test","hello"]}
```

### 4. Deploy the application

> Lets take a quick summary of what has been done so far. We installed the Landscaper plus an OCI registry into a Kubernetes cluster. We pushed the OCI image of our hello application into the OCI registry. We developed the component-descriptor which describes all resources needed for deploying the application, we modified the blueprint which describes what needs to be done to deploy the application. These artifacts were transformed into an OCI artifact and pushed into the OCI registry.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's take a quick summary of what has been done so far. We installed the Landscaper plus an OCI registry into a Kubernetes cluster. We pushed the OCI image of our hello application into the OCI registry. We developed the component-descriptor which describes all resources needed for deploying the application, including the modified blueprint which describes what needs to be done to deploy the application. These artifacts were transformed into a component archive and uploaded as an OCI artifact into the OCI registry.
```

Now, we need to tell Landscaper to pick up the artifacts from the OCI registry and execute the deployment. To achieve this, we need to develop two Kubernetes custom resources.

1. The Target resource. This tells the Landscaper **where** it should deploy the application to. Landscaper currently supports only one target type, a kubernetes cluster.

    ``` yaml
    apiVersion: landscaper.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: Target
    metadata:
      creationTimestamp: null
      name: my-cluster
      namespace: example
    spec:
      config:
        kubeconfig: |+
        <KUBECONFIG>

      type: landscaper.gardener.cloud/kubernetes-cluster
    ```

    Either replace the `<KUBECONFIG>` placeholder with your clusters kubeconfig, or use the landscaper-cli tool (recommended), to create the Target manifest:

    ```bash
    landscaper-cli targets create kubernetes-cluster --name my-cluster --namespace example --target-kubeconfig ~/.kube/config-demo.yaml > ./my-target.yaml
    ```

> 2. The Installation resource. While the Blueprint provided a specification of all Import parameters, the Installation provides concrete values for the Imports. Furthermore, the Installation makes a connection to the component-descriptor associated with the application we are going to deploy. The below Installation specifies the component-descriptor, it specifies which blueprint it shall use (a component-descriptor can contain more than one blueprint). As for the Imports, there is just one parameter which needs to be initialized. There is an Import of type target with the name target. This is the same Target resource, we created in step 1. You find a sample Installation in /manifests/Installation.yaml. Replace the `<OCIURL>` placeholder with the OCI registry URL you created in section "Install the Landscaper together with an OCI registry".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The Installation resource. While the Blueprint provided a specification of all import parameters, the Installation provides concrete values for the imports. Furthermore, the Installation makes a connection to the component-descriptor associated with the application we are going to deploy. The below Installation specifies the component-descriptor and the blueprint in that component descriptor it shall use (a component-descriptor can contain more than one blueprint). As for the imports, there is just one parameter which needs to be initialized. There is an import of type target with the name target. This is the same Target resource, we created in step 1. You find a sample Installation in /manifests/Installation.yaml. Replace the `<OCIURL>` placeholder with the OCI registry URL you created in section "Install the Landscaper together with an OCI registry" such that it is specified where the referenced component descriptor is located.
```

    ``` yaml
    apiVersion: landscaper.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: Installation
    metadata:
      name: manifest-demo
      namespace: example
    spec:
      blueprint:
        ref:
          resourceName: blueprint

      componentDescriptor:
        ref:
          componentName: test.net/test
          repositoryContext:
            baseUrl: <OCIURL>
            type: ociRegistry
          version: v0.1.0

      imports:
        targets:
          - name: cluster
            target: '#my-cluster'
    ```

3. Create **example** namespace

    ``` bash
    kubectl create namespace example
    ```

4. Apply the custom resources to your cluster:

    ``` bash
    kubectl apply -f ./my-target.yaml
    kubectl apply -f ./installation.yaml
    ```

5. Verify the status of the deployment:

    ``` bash
    landscaper-cli installations inspect manifest-demo -n example
    ```

    The final status should look like this:

    ``` bash
    >$ landscaper-cli installations inspect manifest-demo -n example
    [✅ Succeeded] Installation manifest-demo
        └── [✅ Succeeded] DeployItem manifest-demo-default-deploy-item-ncflh
    ```

> 

Reviewer 3: What about verifying the deployed manifests?

Reviewer: Yep, a kubectl get deployment manifest-demo -n example is missing here
